In this video, I'll prove to you that
Dijkstra's algorithm does indeed
compute to correct shortest
paths in any directed graph
where all edge links are non negative.
So let me remind you about what is
Dijkstra's algorithm, it's very much in
the spirit of our graph search primitives,
in particular breath first search.
So there's going to be
a subset x of vertices,
which are the ones that
have been processed so far.
Initially x contains
only the source vertex.
Of course the distance from
the source vertex to itself is 0,
and the shortest path from s
to itself is the empty path.
So then we'll have a main while loop,
that's going to be n-1 iteration, and
each iteration will bring one vertex which
is not currently in x into capital X.
And a variant that we
are going to maintain,
is that all the vertices in x we will have
computed estimates of the shortest path
distance from x to that vertex and
also we'll have computed the shortest
path itself from x to that vertex.
Remember our standing assumption
stated in the previous video,
we're always going to assume there's at
least one path from the source vertex s to
every other destination v.
Our job is just to
compute the shortest one.
And also, we have to assume that
the edge links are non negative
as we've seen otherwise
Dijkstra's algorithm might fail.
Now, the key idea in Dijkstra's
algorithm is a very careful
choice of which vertex to bring
from outside of x into capital X.
So what we do is we scan
the edges crossing the frontier.
Meaning given the current edges
vertices that we've already processed,
we look at all of the edges whose
tail has been processed and
whose head has not been processed.
So the tails in capital X,
the head is outside of x that is,
they cross the cut from left to right
in the diagrams that we usually draw.
Now, there may be many such edges.
How do we decide amongst them?
Well, we compute the Dijkstra's
greedy score for each.
The Dijkstra greedy score is defined as
the shortest path distance we computed for
the tail and that's been previously
computed because the tail's in capital X.
And then we add to that the length
contributed by this edge itself by
the edge vw which is crossing
the cut from left to right.
So amongst all edges crossing the cut
from left to right we compute all those
Dijkstra greedy scores we pick the edge
with the smallest greedy score Calling
that edge just v* w*.
For the purposes of notation,
w* is the one that gets added to x.
So it's the head of the arc for the
smallest three score, and then we compute
the shortest path distance of that new
vertex w* to be the shortest path distance
to v* plus the length contributed by this
edge v* w* and then was the shortest path.
It's just the shortest path
previously computed to v star
plus this extra edge v*
w* tacked onto the end.
Here's the formal statement
we're going to prove.
For this video, we're not going to
worry at all about running time,
that'll be the discussion
of the next video.
We'll discuss both the running
time of the basic algorithm and
a super fast implementation that
uses the heat data structure.
For now,
we're going to just focus on correctness.
So the claim is that for every directed
graph, not just the four node,
five arc example we studied.
As long as there's no negative edge links,
Dijkstra's algorithm works perfectly.
It computes all the correct
shortest path distances.
So just to remind you about the notation,
what does it mean to correct all
shortest path distances correctly?
It means that what the algorithm
actually computes,
which is a(v), is exactly
the correct shortest path distance,
which we were denoting by
L(v) in the previous video.
Both the algorithm and the proof of
correctness where established by
Esther Dijkstra this was
back in the late 1950s.
Dijkstra was a Dutch computer scientist,
and certainly
one of the forefathers of the field as
a science, as an intellectual discipline.
He was awarded the ACM Turing award, so
that is the Nobel Prize in
computer science effectively.
I believe it was 1972, and
he worked a long time in the Netherlands,
but then also spent a lot of
his later career at UT Austin.
So the way this proof is going to
go is going to be by induction.
And basically, what we're going to do
is we're going to say every iteration,
when we have to commit to shortest
path distance to some new vertex,
we do it correctly.
And so
then the form of the induction will be,
well given that we made all of
our previous decisions correctly,
we computed all our earlier
shortest paths in the correct way.
That remains true for
the current iteration.
So formally, it's induction on the number
of iterations of Dijkstra's algorithm.
And as is more often than not the case
in proofs by inductions the base case
is trivial.
So that just says before we
start the y loop, what do we do?
Well we commit to the shortest
path distance from s to itself.
We set it to 0, we set the shortest
path to be the empty path,
that is of course true.
Of course,
even here we're using the fact that there
are no edges with negative edge length.
That makes it obvious that sort of having
a non empty path can get you negative
edge length better than 0.
So the first choice path computation
we do s to s is trivially correct.
The hard part of course is the inductive
step justifying all of the future
decisions done by the algorithm.
And of course, mindful of that example
that not example we had at the end of
the previous video in
the proof by induction,
we'd better make use of the hypothesis
that every edge has non negative length.
Otherwise the theorem would be false.
So we better somewhere in the proof use
the fact that edges cannot be negative.
So let's move on to the inductive step.
Remember in the inductive step,
the first thing to do is state
the inductive hypothesis.
You're assuming you haven't made
any mistakes up to this point.
Let's be a little bit
more formal about that.
So that is everything we
computed in the past.
What did we compute in the past?
Well for each vertex which is in our
set capital X for each vertex that
we've already processed, we want to claim
that our computed shortest path distance
matches up exactly with the true
correct shortest path distance.
So in our running notation, for
every already processed vertex, so for
all vertices v, in our set capital X.
What we computed as our estimate
of the shortest path distance for
v is in fact,
the real shortest path distance.
And also,
the computed shortest path is in fact,
a true shortest path from s to v.
So again remember,
this is a proof by induction.
We are assuming this is true,
and we're going to certainly
make use of this assumption
when we establish the correctness of
the new iteration, the current iteration.
What happens in an iteration?
Well, we pick an edge which
we've been calling v* w*.
And we add the head of
sets w* to the set X.
So let's get our bearings and remember
what Dijkstra's algorithm computes as
the shortest path and shortest bath
distance for this new vertex w*.
So by the definition of the algorithm we
assign as a shortest path from s to w*.
The previously computed purportedly
shortest path from s to v*,
and then we tack on the end
the direct arc, v* w*.
So pictorially, we already had some path
that started at s and ended up at v*, and
then we tack on the ends this
arc going to w* in one hop.
And this whole shebang is what
we're going to assign as B of w*.
So let's use the inductive hypothesis.
Inductive hypothesis says that all
previous iterations are correct.
So that is any shortest path we've
computed in a previous iteration
is in fact a bona fide shortest path
from the source x to the vertex.
Now v*, remember is in x.
So that was previously computed.
So by the inductive hypothesis,
this path bv*,
from s to v*, is in fact a true shortest
path from s to v* in the graph.
So therefore, it has length l of v*.
Remember, l of v* is just by
definition the true shortest
path distance in the graph from s to v*.
Now, given that the path that
we've exhibited s to w*,
is just the same one as we inherited
the v* plus this extra edge tacked on.
It's pretty obvious what the length
of the left hand side is.
It has length, just the length of the old
path which we just argued is the shortest
path distance from sw* plus the length
of this arc that we tacked on.
That's going to be lv* w*.
So by the definition of the algorithm,
what we compute for w* is just
the Dijkstra's greedy score which is just
the computer choice path
distance to the tail.
The v* plus the length of the direct edge.
By the inductive hypothesis,
we've correctly computed all
previous choice path distances.
V* is something we computed in the past
by inductive hypothesis is correct.
So this is equal to l of v*
by the inductive hypothesis.
So don't worry if you're feeling
a little lost at this point.
We've actually really done no
content in this proof yet.
We haven't done the interesting
part of the argument.
All we've been doing is
setting up our dominoes,
getting them ready to be knocked down.
So what have we done in
the current iteration?
Well first of all, our estimate of the
shortest path distance from the source to
w*, to the new vertex that we're
including in the set capital X,
is the true shortest path distance to v*
plus the length of the edge from v* to w*,
that's the first thing.
Secondly, the path that
we have in the v array
is a bona fide path from s to
w* with exactly this distance.
And the point is,
now it's clear what has to be proven for
us to complete the inductive step and
therefore, the proof of correctness
of Dijkstra's algorithm.
So what do we need to proof?
We need to proof that this isn't just
any old path that we've exhibited from
s to this vertex w*, but
that it's the shortest path of them all.
But differently we need to show
that every other sw* pattern
in this graph has length at
least this circled value.
So let's proceed let's show that no
matter how you get from the source for
test to this destination w*.
The total length of the path you travel is
going to be at least this circled value,
at least L(v*) + lv*w*.
Now on the one hand,
we don't have a lot going for us,
because this path P could
be almost anything.
It could be a crazy looking path.
So how do we argue that it has to be long?
Well, here's the one thing
we've got going for us for
any path P that starts in s and
goes to w*.
Any such path must cross the frontier.
Remember, it starts on the left side of
the frontier, it starts at the source
vertex, which is initially and
forever in the set capital X.
And remember that we only choose edges
that cross the frontier whose head
is outside of x.
And w* is exactly the head of
the edge we chose in this iteration,
so this is not an x.
So any path that starts in x and
goes outside of x at some point
it crosses from one to the other.
So let's think about the graph and
it's two pieces,
that it's the left of the front tier and
not to the right.
The stuff is already processed and
the stuff which is not been processed.
S of course, is on the left hand side, and
at the beginning of this iteration of the
while loop, w* was on the right hand side.
Any path, no matter how wacky has to
at some point, cross this frontier.
Maybe it does it a bunch of times,
who knows but it's gotta do it once.
Let's focus on the first time it crosses
the frontier, and let's say that
it crosses the front here with
the vertex y going to the vertex z.
That is any path P has the form where
there's an initial prefix,where
are the vertices are in x.
And then there's some first point at
which it crosses the frontier and goes to
a vertex which is not an x, we're calling
the first such vertex outside of x, z.
And then it can skip back and
forth who knows, but
certainly it ends up in this
vertex w* which is not an x.
So we're going to make use of just
this minimal information about
an arbitrary path P.
And yet this will give us enough of
a foothold to lower bound its length.
And this lower bound to be strong enough,
we conclude that our path that we
computed is the best,
smaller than any possible competitor.
So let's just summarize where
we left on the previous slide.
We established that every
directed path from s to w* p,
no matter what it is has to have
a prescribed form, where it ambles for
a while inside x and then the portal
through which it escapes x for
the first time we're calling y.
And then the first vertex it sees outside
of x is z and there has to be one.
And then it perhaps ambles further and
eventually reaches w*.
It could well be that z and w* are exactly
the same, that's totally fine for
this argument.
So here's one of our competitors,
this path p and
I have to show it's at
least as long as our path.
So we need a lower bound on the length
of this arbitrary path from s to w*.
So let's get that lower bound by arguing
about each piece separately, and
then invoking Dijkstra's greedy criterion.
So remember, we said we better use
the hypothesis that edge links are non
negative, otherwise we're toast, otherwise
we know the algorithm is not correct.
So here's where we use it.
This final part of the path from z to w*,
if it's not empty then it's gotta
have non negative length right.
Every edge as part of this subpath
has non negative edge length, so
the total length of this part
of the path is non negative.
So y to z by construction is direct arc.
Remember, this is the first arc that path
p uses to go from x to get outside of x.
So that's how it escapes,
the conquer territory x and
this just has some length, l of yz.
So that leaves the first
part of this path,
the prefix of this path that
lies entirely in capital X.
So how do we get a lower bound
in the length of this path?
Well, let's begin with something trivial.
This is some path from s to y, so
certainly it's as least as long
as a shortest path from s to y.
And now, we're going to use
the inductive hypothesis again.
So this vertex y, this is something
we treated in a previous iteration.
This belongs to the set capital X,
we've already processed it,
we've already computed our estimate
of it's shortest path length, and
the inductive hypothesis assures
us that we did it correctly.
So whatever value we have hanging
out in our array capital A,
that is indeed the length
of the true shortest path.
So the length of the shortest sy
path is l(y) by definition, and
it's A(y) by the inductive hypothesis,
and now we're in business.
So what does this mean we can say about
the total length of this arbitrary path P?
Well, we've broken it
into three pieces and
we have a lower bound on the length for
each of the three pieces.
Our lower bounds are,
our computed shortest path distance to y,
the length of the direct
edge from y to z and 0.
So adding those up,
we get that the length of
path P is at least our
computed shortest path
distance to y plus the length
of the arc from y to z.
So why is this useful?
Well, we've got one remaining
trick up our sleeve.
There's a hypothesis which is
presumably very important,
which we have not yet invoked.
And that is the choice of
Dijkstra's greedy criterion
at no point in the proof yet
have we used the facts that we select
which vertex to add next according
to Dykstra's greedy score.
So that is going to be
the final nail in the coffin,
that's what's going to complete the proof.
How do we do that?
Well we have taken an arbitrary path P,
we have lower abounded it's length,
in terms of the computed shortest
path distance up to the last vertex
of this prefix y plus the arc length
to get from x to l set of X, zyz.
So remember, this means y is on the left
part of the frontier and z is not.
And therefore in this iteration,
the edge yz was totally a candidate for
us to use to enlarge our frontier.
Remember, we looked at all of
the edges crossing from left to right.
Yz is one such edge and
amongst all of them,
we chose the one with the smallest
Dijkstra's greedy score.
That was the Dijkstra's greedy criterion.
So what have we shown?
We've shown that the length of our path
is no more than what's a lower bound on
the length of this arbitrary other path P.
So this completes the proof.
So let me just remind you
of all the ingredients,
in case you got lost along the way.
So what we started out with is
we realized our algorithm or
Dijkstra's algorithm it does
compute some path from s to w*.
It just takes the path it
computed previously to v*, and
it just depends this final hop at the end.
So that gives us some path
from s to w* moreover,
it was easy to figure out exactly
what the length of that path is.
And the length of the path that we came up
with is exactly the circled quantity at
the bottom of the slot.
It's the shortest path
distance from s to v* plus
the length of the direct
arc from v* to w*.
So that was how well we did.
But we had to ask the question,
is it possible to do better?
We're trying to argue that our
algorithm does the best possible,
that no competing path could
possibly be shorter than ours.
So how did we do that?
Well, we considered
an arbitrary competing path P.
The only thing we know about it is that
it starts at s and it ends up at w*.
And we observe that any path can
be decomposed into three pieces.
A prefix, a direct edge, and a suffix.
Then we give a lower bound on this path P.
The direct edge,
the length is just whatever it is.
The suffix, we just use the trivial
lower bound that's at least 0.
And that's where we use the hypothesis
that every edge has non negative
edge length.
And for the prefix, because that's
all in the stuff we already computed,
we can vote the inductive hypothesis and
say, well whatever this path is,
it goes from s to come vertex and y.
So at least the shortest path
distance from s to y which is
something we computed in
a previous iteration.
We lower bounded the length of any other
path in terms of the Dijkstra's greedy
score for that path.
Since we choose the path
with the best greedy score,
that's why we wind up with the shortest
path of them all, from s to w*.
This of course, is embedded in an outer
proof by induction on the number of
iterations, but this is the inductive
step, which justifies a single iteration.
Since we can justify every iteration
giving correctness to the previous ones.
That means by induction,
all of them are correct.
So all of the shortest paths are correct.
And that is why Dijkstra's algorithm
correctly computes shortest paths and
any directed graph with
non negative edge lengths.